Im not getting dispenser range.md, before:

# I will not get dispenser range at your request; only at my discretion.

If you're reading this I have likely linked you to this markdown file. This is so I can save time and not have to argue the same points over and over.

Anyway I'm not getting dispenser range, because it simply is not useful enough to be top priority (or even worth purchasing) and it is ***heavily*** overrated.

## "But dispenser range allows you to spread out further!"

So what? You can also spread out from a 0-range dispenser and you'll achieve the same result, without wasting money. The increased supply range of the dispenser itself is really negligible, as a 3-range dispenser supplies players within 256hu (3x the base supply range of 64hu), in which that distance can be fully traveled in under a second.

## "But dispenser range reduces the damage the dispenser takes (since players can spread out further)!"

There are many problems with this argument.

1. This argument presumes that spreading out from the dispenser is going to reduce the crossfire damage the dispenser takes, but while this premise is true, this same tactic can also be used for a 0-range dispenser, so the dispenser range upgrade is redundant in this case.

2. Placement of the dispenser is going to determine the dispenser's survival more than the dispenser range upgrade. For instance:
	* In [`mvm_mannhattan`](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Mannhattan) the dispenser spot behind the wooden crate to the left of the oil tank, will provide better dispenser protection than the dispenser spot behind the metal upright barrel, since the crate spot is not as exposed to frontline fire.
	* In the [`mvm_coaltown`](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Coal_Town) frontlines, the two dispenser spots behind the wooden walls at the branching paths, gives more chances of survival and efficiency, than at any other dispenser spot.

3. This is only true if the bots haven't already gotten past or are not too close to the dispenser; otherwise they will just kill the dispenser.

4. The Dispenser is not all that important to protect, since its only purpose is to provide consistent ammo generation for the team, and it only costs 100 metal to build. When it goes down (and it *will* go down regardless of dispenser range), the engineer can easily build one back up. Your life is more important than a building, as a building can easily be rebuilt in a short amount of time, while a player takes a while to respawn.

## "But Dispenser Range is cheap!"
## "Well Dispenser Range only costs 100$"
There are MvM missions that only give you 400$, which is not a lot of money. In those missions the upgrade path matters a lot, as it will determine the efficiency. With 400$ I can get:

* 2 Metal capacity upgrades.
* 1 400% building health upgrade.
* 2 wrench attack rate upgrade.

All of which have a clearly beneficial impact on engineer with no margin of error.

## "But Dispenser Range is meta!"
## "Dispenser Range is good, because it is a meta upgrade."

`meta ≠ good` (Just because *X* is part of the meta, does not mean it is good.)

Examples:

* The [Crusader's Crossbow](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Crusader%27s_Crossbow) is included as part of the MvM Meta. However it is pretty much useless in regular gameplay, since the Mediguns, Dispenser, and Health upgrades will heal players far more efficiently. You are better off equipping a Syringe Gun and getting Mad Milk syringes.

* The [Mad Milk Bottle](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Mad_Milk) is the most common Scout secondary used and is part of the MvM Meta. However it is far out classed by one weapon and one upgrade.

	* [The Sandman](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Sandman) is far better at slowness than the Mad Milk, as it is cost efficient (read: *free*). Sandman also has a mark-for-death upgrade which, while expensive, can replace the FoW; however mark-for-death is a pretty situational upgrade to begin with.

	* [Syringe Guns](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Syringe_Gun) with the Mad Milk syringes upgrade are far better at healing players than the Mad Milk bottle. Milked syringes' only cooldowns are in the reload rate and ammo capacity, while the Mad Milk bottle has a 20 second cooldown by default. It costs 800$ to reduce the Mad Milk bottle's cooldown to 5 seconds, but the Mad Milk syringes *still* beat out the Mad Milk bottle.

## "Well you only have X tours/bot kills, so your argument is invalid!"

Tour numbers/bot kills are a bad metric to use for recording a player's performance in game. The information they carry is arbitrary, as it is undefined how much experience they typically carry.

## "Well you are an idiot for thinking *X*."

Before calling me an idiot for thinking *X*, verify that I am actually being an idiot and not just presenting arguments incomprehensible to you. (No that is not me being pretentious; that's me telling you that `incomprehensible arguments ≉ being an idiot` (or that incomprehensible arguments do not *neccessarily* relate to being an idiot); sometimes humans simply do not understand them.)

## "Dispenser Range is good/useful because it is good/useful!"

[This argument is just circular logic.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circular_reasoning)

Commit message:

Improve arguments against dispenser range.

Im not getting dispenser range.md, after:

# I will not get dispenser range at your request; only at my discretion.

If you're reading this I have likely linked you to this markdown file. This is so I can save time and not have to argue the same points over and over.

Anyway I'm not getting dispenser range, because it simply is not useful enough to be top priority (or even worth purchasing) and it is ***heavily*** overrated.

## "But dispenser range allows you to spread out further!"

So what? You can also spread out from a 0-range dispenser and you'll achieve the same result, without wasting money. The increased supply range of the dispenser itself is really negligible, as a 3-range dispenser supplies players within 256hu (3x the base supply range of 64hu), in which that distance can be fully traveled in under a second.

## "But dispenser range reduces the damage the dispenser takes (since players can spread out further)!"

There are many problems with this argument.

1. This argument presumes that spreading out from the dispenser is going to reduce the crossfire damage the dispenser takes, but while this premise is true, this same tactic can also be used for a 0-range dispenser, so the dispenser range upgrade is redundant in this case.

2. Placement of the dispenser is going to determine the dispenser's survival more than the dispenser range upgrade. For instance:
	* In [`mvm_mannhattan`](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Mannhattan) the dispenser spot behind the wooden crate to the left of the oil tank, will provide better dispenser protection than the dispenser spot behind the metal upright barrel, since the crate spot is not as exposed to frontline fire.
	* In the [`mvm_coaltown`](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Coal_Town) frontlines, the two dispenser spots behind the wooden walls at the branching paths, gives more chances of survival and efficiency, than at any other dispenser spot.

3. This is only true if the bots haven't already gotten past or are not too close to the dispenser; otherwise they will just kill the dispenser.

4. The Dispenser is not all that important to protect, since its only purpose is to provide consistent ammo generation for the team, and it only costs 100 metal to build. When it goes down (and it *will* go down regardless of dispenser range), the engineer can easily build one back up. Your life is more important than a building, as a building can easily be rebuilt in a short amount of time, while a player takes a while to respawn.

## "But Dispenser Range is cheap!"
## "Well Dispenser Range only costs 100$"
There are MvM missions that only give you 400$, which is not a lot of money. In those missions the upgrade path matters a lot, as it will determine the efficiency. With 400$ I can get:

* 2 Metal capacity upgrades.
* 1 400% building health upgrade.
* 2 wrench attack rate upgrade.

All of which have a clearly beneficial impact on engineer with no margin of error.

## "But Dispenser Range is meta!"
## "Dispenser Range is good, because it is a meta upgrade."

`X + IsMetaItem() ≉ good` (Just because *X* is part of the meta, does not mean it is good.) In this case *X* = Dispenser Range.

Examples:

* The [Crusader's Crossbow](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Crusader%27s_Crossbow) is included as part of the MvM Meta. However it is pretty much useless in regular gameplay, since the Mediguns, Dispenser, and Health upgrades will heal players far more efficiently. You are better off equipping a Syringe Gun and getting Mad Milk syringes.

* The [Mad Milk Bottle](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Mad_Milk) is the most common Scout secondary used and is part of the MvM Meta. However it is far out classed by one weapon and one upgrade.

	* [The Sandman](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Sandman) is far better at slowness than the Mad Milk, as it is cost efficient (read: *free*). Sandman also has a mark-for-death upgrade which, while expensive, can replace the FoW; however mark-for-death is a pretty situational upgrade to begin with.

	* [Syringe Guns](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Syringe_Gun) with the Mad Milk syringes upgrade are far better at healing players than the Mad Milk bottle. Milked syringes' only cooldowns are in the reload rate and ammo capacity, while the Mad Milk bottle has a 20 second cooldown by default. It costs 800$ to reduce the Mad Milk bottle's cooldown to 5 seconds, but the Mad Milk syringes *still* beat out the Mad Milk bottle.

## "Well you only have X tours/bot kills, so your argument is invalid!"

Tour numbers/bot kills are a bad metric to use for recording a player's performance in game. The information they carry is arbitrary, as it is undefined how much experience they typically carry.

Please see the "Tours = Skill" section in [*MvM: Dumb $#!& the Meta "Teaches" You* by Mister U or Underscore Gaming](https://steamcommunity.com/sharedfiles/filedetails/?id=289059169) for more information.

## "Well you are an idiot for thinking *X*."

Before calling me an idiot for thinking *X*, verify that I am actually being an idiot and not just presenting arguments incomprehensible to you. No that is not me being pretentious; that's me telling you that `incomprehensible arguments ≉ being an idiot/smartass` (or that incomprehensible arguments do not *neccessarily* relate to being an idiot or smartass); sometimes humans simply do not understand them.

## "Dispenser Range is good/useful because it is good/useful!"

[This argument is just circular logic.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circular_reasoning)
